[Outlook] (prepend-on-send) Create walkthrough (#3817)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/outlook/append-on-send.md

description: Learn how to prepend or append content to a message or appointment body when the mail item is sent.
ms.topic: article
ms.date: 01/23/2023
ms.localizationpriority: medium
---

# Prepend or append content to a message or appointment body on send

The prepend-on-send and append-on-send features enable your Outlook add-in to insert content to the body of a message or appointment when the mail item is sent. These features further boost your users' productivity and security by enabling them to:

- Add sensitivity and classification labels to their messages and appointments for easier item identification and organization.
- Insert disclaimers for legal purposes.
- Add standardized headers for marketing and communication purposes.

In this walkthrough, you'll develop an add-in that prepends a header and appends a disclaimer when a message is sent.

> [!NOTE]
> Support for the append-on-send feature was introduced in requirement set 1.9. See [clients and platforms](/javascript/api/requirement-sets/outlook/outlook-api-requirement-sets#requirement-sets-supported-by-exchange-servers-and-outlook-clients) that support this requirement set.
>

> >The prepend-on-send feature is only available in preview in Outlook on Windows. Features in preview shouldn't be used in production add-ins. We invite you to test this feature in test or development environments and welcome feedback on your experience through GitHub (see the **Feedback** section at the end of this page).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The prepend-on-send feature is only available in preview in Outlook on Windows. Features in preview shouldn't be used in production add-ins. We invite you to test this feature in test or development environments and welcome feedback on your experience through GitHub (see the **Feedback** section at the end of this page).
```

## Prerequisites to preview prepend-on-send

To preview the prepend-on-send feature, install Outlook on Windows, starting with Version 2209 (Build 15707.36127). Once installed, join the [Office Insider program](https://insider.office.com/join/windows) and select the **Beta Channel** option to access Office beta builds.

## Set up your environment

Complete the [Outlook quick start](../quickstarts/outlook-quickstart.md?tabs=yeomangenerator) which creates an add-in project with the Yeoman generator for Office Add-ins.

## Configure the manifest

To configure the manifest, select the tab for the type of manifest you'll use.

# [XML Manifest](#tab/xmlmanifest)

> To enable the prepend-on-send and append-on-send feature in your add-in, you must include the `AppendOnSend` permission in the collection of [ExtendedPermissions](/javascript/api/manifest/extendedpermissions). Additionally, you'll configure function commands to prepend and append content to the message body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the prepend-on-send and append-on-send features in your add-in, you must include the `AppendOnSend` permission in the collection of [ExtendedPermissions](/javascript/api/manifest/extendedpermissions). Additionally, you'll configure function commands to prepend and append content to the message body.
```

            <bt:String id="GroupLabel" DefaultValue="Contoso Add-in"/>
            <bt:String id="TaskpaneButton.Label" DefaultValue="Show Taskpane"/>
            <bt:String id="PrependButton.Label" DefaultValue="Prepend header on send"/>
            <bt:String id="AppendButton.Label" DefaultValue="Append disclaimer on send"/>
          </bt:ShortStrings>
          <bt:LongStrings>
            <bt:String id="TaskpaneButton.Tooltip" DefaultValue="Opens a pane displaying all available properties."/>
            <bt:String id="PrependButton.Tooltip" DefaultValue="Prepend the Contoso header on send."/>
            <bt:String id="AppendButton.Tooltip" DefaultValue="Append the Contoso disclaimer on send."/>
          </bt:LongStrings>
        </Resources>
        <!-- Configures the prepend-on-send and append-on-send features. The same value, AppendOnSend, is used for both features. -->
        <ExtendedPermissions>
          <ExtendedPermission>AppendOnSend</ExtendedPermission>
        </ExtendedPermissions>
      </VersionOverrides>
    </VersionOverrides>
    ```

1. Save your changes.

# [Teams Manifest (developer preview)](#tab/jsonmanifest)

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Append-on-send and prepend-on-send aren't yet supported for the [Teams manifest for Office Add-ins (preview)](../develop/json-manifest-overview.md). This tab is for future use.

Reviewer: I noticed you've been ordering prepend then append so thought this would keep it consistent
```suggestion
> Prepend-on-send and append-on-send features aren't yet supported for the [Teams manifest for Office Add-ins (preview)](../develop/json-manifest-overview.md). This tab is for future use.
```

    }
    ```

1. Save your changes.

---

> [!TIP]
> To learn more about manifests for Outlook add-ins, see [Outlook add-in manifests](manifests.md).

## Implement the prepend-on-send handler (preview)

In this section, you'll implement the JavaScript code to prepend a sample company header to a mail item when it's sent.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The prepend-on-send feature isn't supported in an add-in that implements an [ItemSend event handler](outlook-on-send-addins.md). As an alternative, consider using [Smart Alerts](smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough.md), the newer version of the on-send feature.

1. Navigate to the **./src/commands** folder of your project and open the **commands.js** file.

> 1. Insert the following function to the end of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Insert the following function at the end of the file.
```

            header,
            {
              asyncContext: asyncResult.asyncContext,
              coercionType: bodyFormat
            },
            (asyncResult) => {
              if (asyncResult.status === Office.AsyncResultStatus.Failed) {
                console.log(asyncResult.error.message);
                return;
              }
    
              console.log("The header will be prepended when the mail item is sent.");
              asyncResult.asyncContext.completed();
            }
          );
      });
    }
    ```

1. Save your changes.

## Implement the append-on-send handler

In this section, you'll implement the JavaScript code to append a sample company disclaimer to a mail item when it's sent.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The append-on-send feature isn't supported in an add-in that implements an [ItemSend event handler](outlook-on-send-addins.md). As an alternative, consider using [Smart Alerts](smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough.md), the newer version of the on-send feature.

1. In the same **commands.js** file, insert the following function after the `prependHeaderOnSend` function.

    ```javascript
    function appendDisclaimerOnSend(event) { 

>       // It's recommended to call the getTypeAsync method and pass its returned value to the options.coercionType parameter of the appendOnSendAsync call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // Calls the getTypeAsync method and passes its returned value to the options.coercionType parameter of the appendOnSendAsync call.
```

        
        Office.context.mailbox.item.body.appendOnSendAsync(
          disclaimer,
          {
            asyncContext: asyncResult.asyncContext,
            coercionType: bodyFormat
          },
          (asyncResult) => {
            if (asyncResult.status === Office.AsyncResultStatus.Failed) {
              console.log(asyncResult.error.message);
              return;
            }
    
            console.log("The disclaimer will be appended when the mail item is sent.");
            asyncResult.asyncContext.completed();
          }
        );
      });
    }
    ```

1. Save your changes.

## Register the JavaScript functions

1. In the same **commands.js** file, insert the following after the `appendDisclaimerOnSend` function. These calls map the function name specified in the manifest's **\<FunctionName\>** element to its JavaScript counterpart.

    ```javascript
    Office.actions.associate("prependHeaderOnSend", prependHeaderOnSend);
    Office.actions.associate("appendDisclaimerOnSend", appendDisclaimerOnSend);
    ```

1. Save your changes.

## Update the commands HTML file

1. From the **./src/commands** folder, open the **commands.html** file.

> 1. Replace the existing **script** tag with the following reference to the beta library on the content delivery network (CDN). This retrieve the definitions of the prepend-on-send API that's in preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Replace the existing **script** tag with the following reference to the beta library on the content delivery network (CDN). This retrieves the definitions of the prepend-on-send API that's in preview.
```

1. Create a new message, and add yourself to the **To** line.

1. (Optional) Enter text in the body of the message.

1. From the ribbon or overflow menu, select **Prepend header**.

1. From the ribbon or overflow menu, select **Append disclaimer**.

1. Send the message, then open it from your **Inbox** or **Sent Items** folder to view the inserted content.

    ![A sample of a sent message with the Contoso header prepended and the disclaimer appended to its body.](../images/outlook-prepend-append-on-send.png)

## Review feature behavior and limitations

As you implement prepend-on-send and append-on-send in your add-in, keep the following in mind.

- Prepend-on-send and append-on-send are only supported in compose mode.

- The string to be prepended or appended must not exceed 5,000 characters.

> - HTML can't be prepended or appended to a plain text body of a message or appointment. Conversely, plain text can be added to an HTML-formatted body of a message or appointment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- HTML can't be prepended or appended to a plain text body of a message or appointment. However, plain text can be added to an HTML-formatted body of a message or appointment.
```

- Any formatting applied to prepended or appended content doesn't affect the style of the rest of the mail item's body.

- Prepend-on-send and append-on-send can't be implemented in the same add-in that implements the [on-send feature](outlook-on-send-addins.md). As an alternative, consider implementing [Smart Alerts](smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough.md) instead.

- When implementing Smart Alerts in the same add-in, the prepend-on-send and append-on-send operations occur before the `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` event handler operations.

> - If multiple active add-ins use prepend-on-send or append-on-send, the order of the content to be inserted depends on the order in which the add-in ran. For prepend-on-send, the content of the add-in that runs last appears at the top of the mail item above the previously prepended content. For append-on-send, the content of the add-in that runs last appears at the bottom of the mail item below the previously appended content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If multiple active add-ins use prepend-on-send or append-on-send, the order of the content to be inserted depends on the order in which the add-in ran. For prepend-on-send, the content of the add-in that runs last appears at the top of the mail item body before the previously prepended content. For append-on-send, the content of the add-in that runs last appears at the bottom of the mail item body after the previously appended content.
```

> - Delegate and shared mailbox scenarios are supported as long as the add-in that implements prepend-on-send or append-on-send is enabled on the shared mailbox or delegator's account.

Reviewer: When you say delegator, do you mean the mailbox owner or the authorized delegate? BTW, delegate and delegator have the same meaning.

Author: The mailbox owner. I changed it to say "owner" to avoid confusion.

## Troubleshoot your add-in

If you encounter an error while implementing the prepend-on-send and append-on-send features, refer to the following table for guidance.

|Error|Description|Resolution|
|-----|-----|-----|
|`DataExceedsMaximumSize`|The content to be appended or prepended is longer than 5,000 characters.|Shorten the string you pass to the `data` parameter of your `prependOnSendAsync` or `appendOnSendAsync` call.|

> |`InvalidFormatError`|The message or appointment body is in plain text format, but the `coercionType` passed to the `prependOnSendAsync` or `appendOnSendAsync` method is set to `Office.CoercionType.Html`.|Only plain text can be inserted into a plain text body of a message or appointment. To verify the format of the mail item being composed, it's recommended to call `Office.context.mailbox.item.body.getTypeAsync`, then pass its returned value to your `prependOnSendAsync` or `appendOnSendAsync` call.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|`InvalidFormatError`|The message or appointment body is in plain text format, but the `coercionType` passed to the `prependOnSendAsync` or `appendOnSendAsync` method is set to `Office.CoercionType.Html`.|Only plain text can be inserted into a plain text body of a message or appointment. To verify the format of the mail item being composed, call `Office.context.mailbox.item.body.getTypeAsync`, then pass its returned value to your `prependOnSendAsync` or `appendOnSendAsync` call.|
```
